Castellano is from South America. I come from South America.
I'm a Latina.
Ok, so who is it I'm asking? Just for the introduction, if you're happy to say your name, your date of birth and where you were born, if you can say that in English and also in Castaneda?
Yeah, but you say Spanish if you want to.
Castellano. I know there's a lot of people.
I say Castellano sounds much easier than Spanish.
It's Castellano. We say Castellano because you pronounce the double L.
Ok, Liano.
Yeah, Liano. Because here they pronounce the double L as one and they say Castellano.
But because Castellano is another word, so we say Castellano. The pronunciation is important.
Because you can change the meaning, doesn't it?
Exactly. It's the same as, I cannot pronounce, like the sheep and the sheep, which is the big boat and the little animal.
I had to, I had to get it. You know. I mean Spanish is easier because you say Oveja y el barco.
Ok, so ship and the sheep.
And the sheep, the sheep and the sheep. And then they say, oh I don't know, you know the big, big sheep.
Big sheep, big whatever.
I don't know what. Ok, so please, can you tell us your name and where and when you were born?
Did you want to have my name as the married name or the single name?
It's entirely up to you. It's entirely up to you.
Yeah? Well, it's now because I'm married, so I will say that's Victoria Salas Senese.
I was born on the 26th of August 1947 in a place called Villazon, which is in Bolivia, South America.
Now, do you want me to say in Spanish?
Sure.
So we can just talk about you growing up in Bolivia, of course. Do you remember the area that you grew up in?
Yes, yes. It's called Villazon.
It's in the 25th of May, that was the street where I lived. I was very close to my school, where we used to walk to school.
Yes, I remember very much. I do go at least every year I go back to my country because I miss it.
I miss my people. Yes.
And what was that experience like being able to grow up there and walk to school as well?
Very happy. I grew up in a very happy home, a very loving home. My mother was a workaholic and she brought up five children.
She worked very hard for all of us. All my sisters became professionals and all.
And I married to Jan. So I was 17 when I arrived to this country. And I came in 1965 when I arrived here.
But yes, I remember my childhood very, very happy. Completely happy. I have no regrets. And I miss it all. My family. We were very united family and friends.
Yes, I do miss it. It's a saying that I have and I said, but I left Bolivia. But Bolivia hasn't left me. So I'm always coming back to it.
Is there a particular memory or memory you can share with us on growing up?
Growing up in the memory, the happiest is playing with my friends in the street. And I always remember that.
They were allowed, but in the quiet when parents were busy, we used to sneak out and just the neighborhood, the children.
And they used to be a place, they used to be a San Juan they call. They used to burn wood outside in the streets.
So we used to go and jump all the fires with the children. We used to be, and this was the most memorable. I was really very happy.
And was there other kind of games that you can remember as well?
Yes, the scotch, what they call it, jumping on there. We used to flatten the tops of lemonade and all the little ones.
And we used to take up to the station and we used to put them on the line. So when they're drinking, we used to flatten them.
So we used to make holes in it and then we used to make it for playing. And like a band, we had our own little band of things like that we used to make.
That's incredible. That's quite clever as well actually, knowing that the train had gone through and then innovating and making it.
Yes, we used to put them and say, how can you flatten this up? It takes ages with a hammer.
So I said to them, what does it take them to the left? Because the train used to pass halfway because we live in the front there with Argentina.
So the train used to pass and it had to stop. So of course we used to run and then put it all of a sudden underneath it.
Loads of them. When the train started, we used to watch, you know, they don't jump out. But because the train starts slowly, slowly, slowly.
So when the time it passes, they were all flattened. So we used to make the holes and put the strings in and play with it.
Always to put it in our face and pretend that we were Indians and then we used to dance. They were really brilliant as my childhood.
Even if it's about dancing, is there a certain event as well that you remember going as a family or as a group of friends?
Yes, we did. When I was in school, I used to pick a lot. I was being represented in a lot of things.
And I was very clever in my school that when it came to the end of the year, they used to put a big table at the entrance of the school.
And they used to put all my work there for the parents to see. Because I was very careful in writing.
I used to do drawing and all. And they used to put as an example of what we'd done. And they did that.
And then from, because we started from school, we have over there six years, school six years, college before you can pick to go to university.
It's not like here, inside the college, university. Over there you had to do the school, college, and then you pick for university.
So six years. So I would say, I mean, but now at my age, I could say, yes, I was clever because I jumped from the fifth of the school.
I jumped into college. I didn't do the sixth. I just jumped straight in. Like some, they have to repeat the class. I jumped.
So, yes, that was very, I can tell now, I am very observant and very attentive. I am very eager to learn. I love learning.
And I think that comes from when I was little because my mom said that when I was three years old, I used to read the newspaper.
So, yes, I do many things. I said, God maybe hasn't given me that intelligence to be a professor or have a degree or masters, but he has given me a lot of talent in my hands.
You name it, I do it. There is, my husband would be in the cabinet, I learned from him. I painted and decorated when I came to live here. That was my official, painted and decorated.
I done curtains. I do anything. Do you want me to do it? I do it. I paint pictures. You know, and then over there when I was small, I used to, they used to call me the princess of the poetry.
And every Thursdays I used to be on the radio doing my poetry. And I was having a show off the way I used to do my poetry. I like to put everything into it.
So when I used to go to the frontier, there is a bridge like that, to go from Bolivia to Argentina. The gendarmes, which are in Argentina, they recognize me. And they used to say, here comes the princess of the poetry.
And was there also like traditional, was there also traditional events?
Yes, I played football for college over there. I have played football. We went to different colleges to play and we used to win.
And I did have a lot of photographs, but because I moved so much in here when I arrived, that I lost some of them.
But then when I was 14 over there, I was elected beauty queen of my country. And that was the first, the year. And then I done it for two years. They had it one year after the other.
And then when I went to Argentina then, I passed to Argentina in Buenos Aires. I went to study there.
And also there, they asked me if I could represent, there was the river plate, the club river plate in Argentina to represent them. So I had to go again.
I wanted to be a nun. I love God so much. I wanted to be a nun. But my parents won't. So they accepted the first time when they went to my house to ask him, ask him to say, because they elect you.
You don't go and say, oh I want to represent, I want to be, no, they elect you. They look at you and they elect you.
And they went and asked my parents if I can take part in this event, which they accepted. I didn't want to because when I had to put on my costume I was walking like this.
I didn't want to. But then after that I thought, oh well, I competed with my teacher and I won.
She was older than me. I mean she had the body of a woman. But at that time I looked older. And yes, I won. And I passed them all.
So lucky. And then the next year they asked me again. And then as I said, when I went to Argentina, they asked me, they asked me directly, they didn't ask my parents, they asked me directly if I would like to represent the river plate, the club river plate.
I got photographs, you know, I got photo stuff there to show that I was. And they put me in this big car, things that we had to, they drove all the way to the stadium.
So you have to go, you know, wave in and all that. Then you got the people who elected. They don't elect you. At the door you have to buy a ticket, a number.
And you say, I want to, you said I want to for Victoria. And then the people that come in, that's what they do. So at the end of the day, you go to the night to go to the dance.
And in there then you all sit down because nobody knows anything. And then they started taking how many tickets they sold for how many. And I won.
I won again. So I had the walls with my dad. It was lovely. That's memorable things.
And then as I said, when I went to Buenos Aires and River Plate and we went to do this thing around and everything, they did the same.
You know, they started, they all sit down. They called the name in third place and so and so and second place and so and so. And then Cammy says in the first place say Victoria Salas.
And I'm, oh, again. But this time I was just, you know.
Comforting, right?
More comforting. And I don't know.
Yeah, I had all that. And then I've been elected and so many things. And here, when we arrived here, I've been on television, salsa dancing.
I've been a teacher of salsa dancing in Cardiff.
And you said you came here 17.
I was 17. It was 1965 when I came here.
Okay. Yeah. And because I married to an officer of a ship.
He was a first officer of a ship in Buenos Aires.
I married him. Came here straight to Newport.
And I arrived on a plane. I came on a plane after.
And we lived in Malpass Road for a while.
But our relationship, it wasn't as good as.
We don't get on.
We were black and white. You know, there was no gray.
There was nothing in between to compromise or to try to get together.
No. It's either this or it's either that.
And me, coming from a happy home, you know, I'm a very happy person.
I'm very positive. And I was thinking, you know, this is not for me.
I couldn't. So I sit down and said, look, this is not working.
And bear in mind, I had two children.
And I was married at 17. I got at 18, 19, 20.
At 22, I had my second child.
And at 22, about 23, 24, 25, 26, I was divorced.
So I couldn't take my children because they had no family here to take them.
Or nothing.
So I had to live on my own.
Find a place to live.
And I started working.
And learning and working.
And, you know, I came okay.
I did okay. I had my ups and downs.
And I always think of God.
I think He has given me the two sides of the coin.
Because I came from a good home.
Which we had maids.
We had nothing to do.
And I arrived here, which I had to do it.
You know, because, and it's like saying, once you become a mother, you stop being a woman.
So I had to dedicate to my children.
You know, everything for my children.
And then I had to go to work.
We stopped working in the evenings.
I didn't need to, but I had to do something.
You know, I'm not a person to sit.
I had to do something.
And then after I had to leave my children with him.
Until I got to, we went to court.
And I said, well I want my children.
They won't have them because I had nowhere to take them.
So I had to rent a room in Mendy.
So I just dedicated to work.
As I'm a hairdresser as well.
A professional hairdresser.
I got my diploma because I learned that over there.
I told you, I'm a woman of many, many talents.
And I had that.
I started working in the day as a hairdresser.
In Mendy.
And then I used to work in the night club as a barmaid.
And then I started working when night clubs up here.
I used to work there as well.
In the evenings I used to go out and work.
So I just worked and then I needed to learn.
I started learning more.
I never went to school to learn English.
I learned on my own.
But just asking people, please could you correct me.
Because I'm not sure if I am saying okay.
And yeah, if anybody would say anything to me.
I said, oh don't offend.
I said, I'm not getting offended.
I'm grateful that you corrected me.
As long as you correct me the right way, that's fine.
Yeah, I came out.
Then I met my second husband now, Italian.
And we're 42 years married now.
And we have one child.
You know he's 40 now.
He lives next door to me.
Because he said, mommy says I love you so much.
He said I'll marry you and I'll never leave you.
And I said to him, I know because I said you didn't want to.
You didn't marry me.
He said you didn't love me because he lives next door.
He lives next door to me.
So yes, life has been good.
Near port, Wales have treated me with respect.
And maybe in a way it's because I talk to anybody.
My husband said you talk even to the birds.
I mean when I'm passing by as in pigeons.
I said excuse me ladies.
My husband said you talk to anybody.
I said I don't want to talk to you because you're going to be okay.
And I said yeah, I said I have to.
You know, I didn't have no guidance of anybody.
I have nobody to tell me I'm doing right.
So I lived my life if you like.
The best I could.
And then when the pandemic came and we had to be locked.
I started reading the Bible.
And it changed me.
Made me understood a lot of things that I wanted to know.
Why?
I didn't question God because he knows what he's doing.
But I needed to know because I think God, you have given me a talent.
But you haven't given me the place to try to work it out.
You know?
Where my life has to be.
And yes, it has changed.
I had a good life.
I mean I'm a decent person.
I am not one of those.
I never smoke or drink, go to night clubs.
Never got the attention to be anything like that.
It's the way we've been brought up.
And I'm thinking I'm a mother.
I had to respect myself.
Because I don't want anybody to see my children.
I said, oh your mother, this is why your mother that.
So that's why I brought my children.
And I'm proud to say my children are good children too.
That's fantastic.
And I'm happy that you said it about learning.
Like wanting to learn.
And how all of your experiences were giving you.
Giving you like these moments to be able to learn something.
Yes.
And then apply it if you wanted to as well.
And then you have to take time to grow in the way that you needed to.
And even, you mentioned earlier on about,
I was going to ask whether it's from your mother in being at work.
Knowing that you need to work and regardless.
That's right.
And how you ended up putting that for yourself.
Ready for the children as well.
It's like they say, and what I learned from my mother is.
You cannot teach your children.
Your children would learn by seeing you.
We are the example to our children.
So what I saw my mother.
She was a great colleague she was.
And she done everything to keep us good.
I mean I couldn't really say.
I couldn't have wished my mother was with me.
You know.
And do things together with it.
When she didn't work she dedicated her time to us.
You know.
And she used to be a wonderful cook and making cakes and all that.
And I learned everything from her.
Which idols, idols I usually like.
I bake.
I do cakes.
I sell.
My grandchildren won't have from anywhere else cakes.
I have to make them.
So yes.
Life has been good to me.
Why is that important as well.
To just be an example.
And you just said a little bit about the children and the next generation just learn.
But why do you think that's very important.
And why we should be carrying that on in terms of tradition.
So young people can learn.
Well I think it's important to have a good example.
And I think that's what I learned from my mother.
But my understanding is because to be a better person.
To be a good person.
I teach them to respect.
Regardless the gender, color, religion, whatever.
I always teach my children to respect.
You want to be respected.
You have to respect.
You know you cannot buy respect.
Respect has to be how you treat people.
And I always say to them they have to work.
They have to be good people.
You have to help.
Who needs help?
You know you have to because this is me.
I cannot see anybody.
I have to be there.
You know and I think can I help you?
You want anything?
My neighbors they are ill.
I'm there.
You want to be good shop?
You know it's always thinking this is what God wants us to do.
Now I learned that and I'm thinking I'm not doing it for me.
I'm not doing it really for them because that's what he wants.
And it's like you say you're doing this to this person.
You're doing it to me.
And I'm hurting Jesus.
And I cannot do that.
You know it's not in my hands.
So yes and I teach my children.
And I thank God that they are very good.
My kids they haven't been involved in anything.
Police or drugs or anything like that.
I know they don't drink excessively.
They don't smoke any of them.
And it's because what they see at home.
Exactly.
I'm going to read this here as an example.
And speak about example as well.
Did you have an expectation of what Newport was going to be like?
Before you moved here?
Yeah.
Well when I arrived it broke my heart to leave my family and my country.
But I was excited because I was young and it was an adventure for me.
Something different.
Something new.
When I arrived in London they picked me up and they brought me.
And they took me.
My husband was living in Lamberne.
And they took me there.
And I didn't realize how narrow the things had to go.
And when the car was going I was like this.
And he was still laughing.
He was going and I was like oh he's going to go through that tree and all.
And then when we arrived to the house I realized how little the doors are.
Because back home we have double doors.
Wherever we have.
You go to the light room and you have double doors.
And my bedroom was massive back home.
I had my bed.
I had all my stuff that I used to make.
And I come in here and I thought this is doll's house.
And people live in doll's houses in here.
And the snow was up there when I arrived.
And I was expecting my first child.
Because I was expecting when I arrived like that.
But I arrived in October and in November the 9th my child was born.
In Lydia Baynon.
It was called.
I don't know what they are now.
But it's not hospital Lydia Baynon in Ask.
Yeah he was born there.
And because the snow was so far.
And they put me into this room and I see the snow in there.
And I just started crying.
Because I had never seen snow before.
And I thought she was so beautiful.
And then all the squirrels were coming down.
And I felt like Alice in Wonderland.
And I thought so beautiful.
And I think how so different countries.
They have so many different things.
And that's when I started getting deeper into learning more about things.
About the Vikings.
How the Dachshund has come to be.
Why is English people which they are not pure.
Because they come in from what they call the Anglo-Saxons.
And things like that.
And then I started getting into history.
And I love it.
I love it.
And I said to my husband when I watch it tell you.
I said I'm not watching to entertain me.
I'm watching to learn.
So yes.
And did you gather friends as well actually.
In your experiences.
Whether it was wanting to learn or the things that you watch.
The places that you go.
Were you able to start building friends.
Yes I have.
I came in a new port.
And I was learning only Latin.
Because nobody here speaks Spanish or anything like that.
And as I said I couldn't speak much English myself.
Because I had to learn.
So yes I met one girl.
Somebody told me that it was a Colombian girl.
I met her.
And we embraced and we cried.
Because she also thought she was the only one.
So she lived in Malpas.
So we were not far away from each other.
And yes we got together.
And then from then on.
Then she started doing other things.
When she met other Latins.
When she introduced me to them.
Then I met more Latins.
I introduced them.
So in the end we had.
We had what you call it.
Isla Latina.
I don't know if you ever hear it.
We used to go to.
What is the other place where they all go.
Eaton Road.
We used to go to Eaton Road.
We had a place there.
We used to do parties.
We used to gather there together.
Yes and the council.
He used to give us.
Pay for us all the stuff that we used to do it.
And yes that's where we came to be.
And we started learning from each other's cultures.
With Colombia.
Argentina.
It was only Bolivia but it were El Salvador.
There were different countries.
And then we used to gather together.
And say each of you can we take a plate of your own country.
So we used to put everybody will take something and put at the table.
Also then we used to eat.
Yes it was really nice.
Yes and that's like that's that culture and like preservation as well.
It's a good way fantastic way to share culture and to carry it moving.
Is there other ways that you were able to do that as well.
Definitely for your children or other communities.
Yes when I came when I came when I didn't brought anything with me.
It's only late when I started going back to my country.
I started bringing little ornaments of my country.
You know I got ornaments.
Yes I do have some and I introduced it to them.
Even ornaments from Argentina because we lived near frontier.
And yes I brought it.
They call it a caucho.
It's like the Americans they have the cowboys.
The Argentinians have the cauchos.
Which they get the cows you know in the countryside.
There's such a site is beautiful site that is.
The way they dressed and everything.
The proper cauchos you know.
And yes I brought things like that too.
And I talked to my children about my culture my country.
You know about the Incas.
You know because that's what it comes from the Incas.
And I said my mother used to speak Quechua.
And she used to speak Aymara.
Which the Aymara is there actually before of the Incas.
And when the Incas came there was the Quechua introduced.
Which is the original as Welsh will have the Welsh language.
So they had.
My mother used to speak French, Spanish, Quechua.
So she was quite clever as well.
She's you know learned from her.
Yes that's what I do to my kids.
Incredible.
They have to know they have to know your roots.
And I always said to my husband I'm not going to die in this country.
I want to go back. I want to go back.
But now that I went back last February.
I was disappointed because everything has changed.
There's so much. Everything has been closed.
Families and friends they passed.
I don't like to say they died because we don't really die.
We transcend it. We go to another level.
And I always said we you know they all gone.
It's not the same anymore.
And this year I didn't because I should have been there now.
I should have been there for a month, month, two months ago.
But I should have been there.
But then my poor husband I leave it always on his own for a long time.
And then I said I promised him not to go.
And he said you say that every year.
I said no. Every year I said I will not go next year.
But I never promised.
And I said you know my promises. I never break them.
So I said I promise.
Even if I'm itching to go.
And I think I should be there.
And I said no I promise.
And I'm not going.
But I do get contacted with friends through the internet.
You know through Facebook.
And we see through the camera each other.
Yeah it's a marvelous invention.
Truly.
Yeah I still get contacted with them.
And my family and my friends.
I went to the last time I went I told one of my friends I found her.
And I said I was coming over.
And she said when you arrive in.
And I told her.
And she said come over.
And he said I will wait for you.
And I did. And I didn't know that she passed on.
And there were quite a few.
We started from kinder to school to college.
They were there.
All grown up.
We all embraced and cried.
And no you don't remember this and remember that.
It was also a little brilliant.
Brilliant brilliant.
You know I got such a good memories.
Happy memories.
It's something that you're not there.
You're not going to repeat it.
But it's all here.
It's all there.
And then goes into your heart.
And so loving and thinking you know how lucky I have been really.
To have such a good friends.
And my family.
So yes.
And that experience and how important it is to just have gratitude.
Isn't it?
And to have them.
And to be able to share it with others that have had experience and bring it together.
So I wanted to just speak about Age Alive.
Is that here?
How did you end up coming in contact with Age Alive?
It's only just now that I'm beginning to try to get into them.
Because it's not very long that I joined them.
But as I said I am a person that I don't like.
I don't like discrimination.
As I said to you that regardless of whatever respect has to be.
As I said you could be a master in whatever.
You had your diplomas and you had this and you got that.
But you're ignorant in respect.
You know you could be yes I can do this and I can solve this and solve that.
But what is your everyday life?
How you treat people?
Just because you are going to be a master or you go to thousands or whatever.
Or you live in a castle or whatever.
That does not give you the right to look down to anybody.
Because in the eyes of the Lord we are all equal.
The Queen didn't bleed blue.
You don't bleed black.
I don't bleed any brown thing.
I have blood that is red to everybody.
And therefore we have feelings.
Same feelings that you have I have.
You can cry I cry.
I laugh I laugh.
So therefore I said where is the discrimination and why?
It has no right anybody to discriminate anybody.
And that gets me.
Because I'm thinking please Lord do something about it.
There's nothing that you cannot do.
Why all these things happen?
And if I happen to be there and hear somebody say I have to step in.
And I say how on a minute who the hell do you think you are?
To talk at this person that way.
Look in the mirror yourself first.
I always give him something for him to think about it.
And I said to them you want to be respected.
Learn to respect first.
If you don't know what respect is, it's an addictionary.
I recommend you to have a good study of it.
So yes.
I was coming out of the church one day.
And this lady was going up.
I don't know if she was Indian or whatever.
From India or something.
And she was coming up with a bag.
And she said to me hello.
I said hiya.
And he said are you coming up from there?
I said no.
I said I just come from the church.
He said would you like to join in?
He says come in.
She says we bring food and we bring this.
Oh that's lovely.
He said I'm taking samosas.
And I looked at her and yes she done a lot.
He says have one.
I thought oh lovely I took one.
And he says samosas.
You know.
She's driving me so that I can't go there.
And I said to her well I cannot make it today.
But I said well I will come one day.
But it passed weeks.
And it's I don't know if you believe it like when you hear something telling you.
I do.
I'm very spiritual as well.
I can tell you that.
And it's always the ghost belief that I guess somebody's telling me that I should go there.
You know.
And I said to my husband you know what I said Wednesdays.
I said the lady I'm sure she said Wednesdays.
I said I'll come because I go to mass.
And then when they end the mass I can see the people going.
So I was outside you know thinking should I go in.
And what do I say.
What are they going to say.
You know and all that.
Because I look and then I think well there's a lot of black ladies we go in.
The way Indians with the way they dress that they will go in.
And I said well I can't.
They will say me what happened.
I thought oh well never mind.
I'm Victoria.
I thought I'd come in.
I opened the door.
Good morning everybody.
And then Troy called me.
He went.
And I went in and introduced him.
So I said well I cannot remember who invited me here.
But I said you know I.
And then they all welcomed me.
And I they made me at ease.
And then I thought oh I like this.
So they from them and then I started going.
You know to them.
But I don't say anything.
I don't express any opinion.
I just sit back and listen.
I'm learning.
I study people's you know who your personalities and all that.
Yeah I don't.
I don't.
And I said to me you have to say it and you can't this and that because you're one of us.
And I think okay thank you very much.
But I still in the background.
I don't.
Because if I might say something somebody else they don't agree.
So I think you know I better shut up and then see what everybody's doing what's happening.
It's only when sometimes they say do you agree.
Then you say OK.
I don't agree.
Yes OK.
So what does it mean to you as well.
What does it mean to you.
They do a lot of hard work.
And I think they are on.
I was there in my page.
You know they are on my page because what are they trying to do is what I believe that she should be done.
And maybe because I haven't got the knowledge to for me to go forward and do what they do it.
But as I said I'm learning.
And as I said it's respected and is trying to help the people that they need.
And you know whatever I get on.
I think anyway I don't know whether they agree or not.
But I think I get on with them.
It's like my husband said who could not get on with you.
She said you know I mean the way you are.
You always talk.
I go on a plane.
I talk to the people who they go in.
And we go into laughs by the time we arrive there.
It's like that.
If I'm waiting at the bus or something and I'm always talking to the next one.
You know.
And it's cold isn't it.
You start with something and then we laugh.
That's life.
You only hear one's wife doing it.
You know.
And I think if everybody would think that.
We only have one chance.
Any problems you have in life it can be solved.
Except death.
That is one thing that you cannot solve.
You can go on holidays for a month or two.
But you know you're coming back.
The one who died is not coming back.
And it's good.
Said so.
Otherwise he takes his breath away and that's it.
So I always say to them why.
Why not being happy.
Why not being positive.
At the end of the day you're not doing it for the person.
You're doing it for yourself.
You know.
If you have love in your heart.
You won't have nothing else to give.
You won't have anything else to give.
Yeah.
If you are nasty and you're always with some negative stuff like that.
I said that's what you give.
That when people I see people like that.
And I think of course she's got a very sad heart.
You know.
That's what I'm thinking.
I wish we could change her.
Yeah.
And I'm quite spiritual.
I talk to God.
Every night.
I talk to my angels.
And I tell you one thing why I believe so much in the miracle.
In my house.
You know the steps to go upstairs.
I was on the fifth cleaning.
And you got the cord got stuck.
Now bear in mind I was cleaning standing like this.
And it got stuck.
So I went like this and pull it.
And the cord pulled me back.
And I went diving like that.
Now when I did this.
There's the radiator here.
That's the front door there.
And the space from there to there.
The houses that we have.
Now with the way I landed there.
I should have banged exactly.
But I promise you.
Someone was holding my head like this.
I felt my head was like this.
Because when you back.
What it goes is your head first.
Your head you got.
It's your head.
When I landed I landed it.
And I felt a hand because my head was like this.
And I thought.
Thank you God.
Because otherwise if I would have been completely cold there.
When my husband came back from work.
He would have had to push the front door.
To get me out of the way.
And that was early in the morning.
In Spain I had my car.
I went around the corner.
I don't know whatever happened.
I felt an explosion.
And then I thought oh.
I could feel the car going and I break and all like that.
And suddenly I could see people running and all that.
And I opened the door to go.
Everybody said are you okay?
I said yeah I'm fine.
Your neck?
No I'm fine.
When I look at my car.
It was completely gone.
The tires exploded.
All the chairs where I was seated.
All it was open completely.
It was open.
I don't know how.
And everything from there was high in.
They had to call the.
What do you call it?
They took my car and they took away.
And all the scratches.
And I was thinking thank God.
I always thank God because I think he's the one who looks after me.
And here at the hospital when I went to have x-rays.
My husband says Vicky the way you fall and all that he said.
Because I was 60 when that happened.
And that's our bones at that age.
It started getting just a bit.
And I got to try this.
Which makes it even worse.
And when I went in there I had my x-rays and everything.
They can't see no one's scratch.
And he said to me somebody's looking after you.
He says at your age you should have at least something broken.
Or something.
Nothing.
On the x-rays.
And it's me praying when I go there.
I just pray and pray.
And the first thing I always say thank you Lord.
Thank you so much for this.
So.
Thank you.
Thank you so much for sharing.
And for expressing this.
Which I have never really talked to anybody so much about it.
Because I don't think many people are interested in somebody's life.
But I think it is interesting really to find out.
That's why when I go to these people.
They age alive.
I ask them little questions about their cultures.
And you know how do you feel about it.
And all this.
And quite a few of them have come when they were young.
They all think the same.
They like to go back.
You know.
I always say to my husband I don't want to die in this country.
And I don't want to die here.
I want to go home.
I said that is my home.
I have to go home.
But now I thought come on Victoria think about it.
My home is here now.
For 58 years that I've been here.
And I'm thinking it is my home here.
I have my children here.
My grandchildren.
I thought maybe you had a reason to bring me here.
I'm a very strong believer in things happen for a reason.
It always happens for a reason.
A friend of mine is supposed to go away.
His wife decided to do something.
She went back.
And they missed the coach.
He was mad.
And she said yeah but I can help it.
Halfway there.
This is a time years ago.
The coach had an accident.
There was no survivors.
See.
There is a reason why they bring you back.
And I always say to my husband if you want to do something.
But suddenly something happened.
I said don't hurry for anything.
I said there is a reason why it's happening.
I said listen.
What God says your eyes look your ears listen.
I said they telling you.
Do you know they wake me up at 3 o'clock in the morning.
And I never understood why I wake up every morning.
At 3 o'clock in the morning.
And then I realized now and they said the God wakes you up.
Because I'm spiritual.
Maybe.
And I think now I understand.
So what I do I get up and pray.
You know pray for the world.
Pray for the people.
Pray for everybody who is vagus.
And I said to them give him strength and carry on.
I talked to them.
And some of them I said.
Why are you in this business.
And I said but why are you in this street.
And these stories they tell you.
It's so hard.
It's you know you can cry.
And a lot of people they said oh because they have drugs and because they drink it.
And I said before you judge anybody.
Find out why they drink.
Why in drugs.
Why is he I said in the cold.
And I said and he has to feel the cold.
But I said if he drinks.
And he passes.
He will feel the cold.
And he said look and when I talk to the people that's what they tell me.
And they said I don't want to.
I don't like it if I have a place where to stay.
But he said with this I fall asleep.
And don't feel nothing until I wake up the next day.
And it's so sad.
That shouldn't happen.
It shouldn't happen.
You're never going to know unless you have those conversations and ask them.
It's like you mentioned earlier on about that.
The respect as well.
Exactly.
And he was the same.
He was a what do you call it.
Selling magazines.
And he was only I think he was 18 19.
And I started talking to him and I gave him clothes of my sons.
Because they were more or less the same and all.
And my son he had to buy something that he don't want it and all that.
So I used to get the clothes and I used to give it to him.
I said darling I said if you don't want to.
I said you can give it away to somebody else or sell it.
I said you have a lot of money.
No he said no thank you so much.
And then he says what was your name.
And I said Victoria.
And I said what was yours.
I think it was Paul.
And I said okay Paul nice to meet you darling.
I said you take care of yourself.
I give him money to have breakfast or what have you.
And I haven't seen him for a while.
And then suddenly Victoria.
Victoria.
And I turned around.
I said I'm your Paul.
I said why couldn't you look good.
I said why.
He said I got a girlfriend.
I got a place and I'm going to be a dad.
That was lovely.
I said I'm glad I said now.
Be a good father.
Yes I said you want it.
I said you pretend I'm your mom.
Yeah I said and I'm telling you be a good father.
Stay away from the streets.
I said you didn't like that.
So think you don't want your child to be in that situation.
So I said as a father you have to fight.
I said because now you stop to be a man.
And now you're a father.
Think not on you.
Think of where you go there.
That's precious.
And that is a gift from God.
I said don't ruin it.
Don't throw it away.
I said I respect your wife.
I said communicate.
You don't like what she's doing.
Let her know.
No shouting.
No screaming but with words.
Respect.
You respect her.
She will respect you.
So what life will be is how I practice.
I'm passing on to you.
I've been down.
I have been in a marriage.
They didn't work.
And I have been gone down.
And I said but I come up because determination.
And you think you have to love yourself first.
Respect yourself first.
And then it will be easier to give to the rest.
And the rest will see in that.
Will come back to you.
Now if it's a person who will insult you or say something.
Rather than you tell him oh the words that you use.
No you come down and say oh God bless you.
Simple.
You know what a person will do.
He will feel like that.
Because he's aggressive.
He's all these.
Are you calm?
Because all your emotions come from here.
And if you learn to control that and pass that into that.
Which is the intelligence.
And I said you just say anybody say anything.
God bless you.
And you will be happy with the words on their mouth.
Or not.
Do you agree?
There you are.
So have I answered all the questions?
Indeed you have.
And more.